Good evening everyone
and welcome at the
Going Digital conference
at the panel that is called
“Is the future of democracy digital?”
At this panel we will discuss
problems and questions
that are closely related
to digital agenda
and digital technologies
in the context of our democracy
and democratic systems
Before we move to the introduction
of our panelists
and before we move to discussion itself,
please let me tell you
some organizational matters
Just briefly
This panel is divided into
two main parts
In the first part,
we will discuss three main subtopics
which are closely related to the
to the topic of the panel
Firstly, we will discuss
the influence of technologies
on our society
Secondly, we will discuss also
the positive impact
A possible positive impact
of technologies on our democracy
And thirdly,
we will discuss problematic
of internet giants
and their possible regulation
In the second part of the panel,
there will be time for your questions
Questions from the audience
Now I'm talking to the audience
If you have any question
don't hesitate to ask
in the chatroom
and in the second part of the panel
we will get to your questions and
find the answers I hope
And please I also kindly ask you to mute
your microphones and cameras
Before we move to discussion itself
please let me introduce
our dear panelists
I'm very glad to welcome here
Miss Renata Ávila Pinto
Who is a Guatemalan international
Human Rights and technology lawyer
and author
and she is also a co-founder and council
member of the
Progressive international
and also she is the co-founder
of the Alliance for
Inclusive Algorithms
She also defended
WikiLeaks and Julian Assange
and she is also advisor for
just digital transformation
against digital colonialism
Miss Renata Ávila welcome
I’m also welcoming Mr. Vojtěch Pikal
who is vice chairman
of the Czech Pirate Party
and he is also vice chairman of
the Chamber of Deputies of
the Parliament of the Czech Republic
where he focuses mainly on elections,
democracies and constitutional affairs
And last but not least,
I would also introduce
Mr. Vojtěch Boháč
Who is a journalist,
editor-in-chief
and also co-founder
of the Voxpot project
where he focuses mainly on
conflicts, East Europe,
Balkan states or the Near East
Hello
Now we move to discussion itself
Firstly
I would like to ask and I turn
to Miss Avila Pinto
Please, I would like to ask you
how digital technologies
especially the internet and
social media
influence our society and politics
and political environment?
To be more specific,
do you think that there is still
a distinction between
voters and users nowadays?
I was starting by saying that
we are facing our democracy's
new inequalities
and with the very basic issue of
connectivity, for example
and this situation right now
like illustrates it very well
You know, like
Do the usual,
you know,
if you are in the center of the city
and you have access to more services?
Do you have access to more information?
Do you have access to the institutions?
you add now the layer of more distance
Which is like saw as distance
between political parties,
the public administration
and the people who are left behind
in areas with poor infrastructure
Let’s remember that through
all this panel
because I think that we
take connectivity for granted
and we take connectivity
and skills for granted
and then the day that the voters
are casting their ballots,
we realise that there's
lots of people who
the message,
because we relied so heavily
on internet and online,
we never reached them
Our message never
Progressive politics messages
never reached them
because we assume
We take digital as granted
This is the first thing to remember
and the first layer of dependency,
I would say
How layer of dependency?
Because when we activate
and when we do all of
our social activism,
political activism
and outreach to voters
using tools that are based
in the US most of the times
Hosted in the US
Based in the US and so on
We are also creating
a layer of dependency
of our political movements to data
and are also being a little bit reckless,
I would say, because
On the one hand,
we are using the powerful tools
that have been developed
in the last years
to target
to reach out
and to expand our bases
and our message
but we are not doing it in our own
We are not growing the flowers,
let’s say the flowers of democracy,
in our own garden
We are growing the flowers
for someone else to cut them
and to kick us out of the garden
I think that that is
an important thing to remember
when we think of Facebook,
when we think of Twitter,
when we think of most of the tools
that we are using today
And it's very interesting that
I'm addressing a European audience
Because
In my country,
to be fully honest
Okay, we could and we have
a small team of engineers
and we could develop some tools
that are okay-ish
But you c’mon Europe
Europe has all the abilities,
all the skills
All the right frames
to develop their own
technologies for democracy
and its
I think you understand why in 20 years
it didn't happen
The second thing
The second layer is the
The first is connectivity,
then the technologies that we use
and the third thing I will say
is regulation
In spite of GDPR
and in spite of all the efforts that
the European Union has done
to shape technology according to
European values
The regulation comes too late
Because if we wanted to
shield democracies
and if we wanted to shield the voters
and if we wanted to shield the process
of free and fair elections
The moment to regulate is not when
the technologies are already deployed
but it's in the moment of deciding
And I think that
their regulation came too late
when the extractive mode
the data extractivism model was
so integrated in the technologies
that we used to mediate
our political relationships
That
we put in the same bucket
political relationships,
then personal relationship
then commercial relationships
with people we connected with
And what you said like
the difference of users and citizens
That is precisely the problem because
the design of most of the technologies
that we use today,
of the social media technologies
that we use today
is
it's that
is of use
Of general purpose
Of use
In any situation
And the relationship of a citizen
A citizen with other
or a citizen with
the public administration
or with the political parties
The development and the potential
expansion of the civic life
It should be shaped
and it should be designed
and it should be like deployed
following different rules
And that's one of the things I want to
[inaudible]
I mean, I would maybe
Maybe a good idea to think of
a better digital democracy
would be to think of
of different spheres of interaction
where a person has
its relationship with commerce
separated by law maybe
from its relationship with politics
and not all has to happen
in the same platform
Those are like my initial thoughts
Yeah, of course the problem
that we have today is that
the technologies that we use
are not framed for users,
not for citizens
and not for exercise of full democracy
Thank you very much for now
We will come back to this topic
We will discuss algorithms and
non-transparent algorithms
In a few minutes
Right now I would like to ask Mr. Pikal
You are an active politician
You are member of
the Chamber of Deputies
of the Parliament of
the Czech Republic
so I would like to ask you
What's your point of view
when it comes on the question
How internet technologies influence
voters decision-making?
Well, we need to understand that
our current democratic system
as it is built in most republic
nations states,
as we know it today,
was built for different sort of
political discussion
and political decision-making
that we experience now
Because
it is designed that
the political discussion
because democracy is not only about
distribution of votes
and how you count them
It is also about distribution
of speech
and I think that
changing environment and changing
internet environment
reminds us of that
Because now everyone can own
a newspaper of their own
And the distribution channels are
privately owned by enterprises
that are here to sell us advertisements
and use our emotions to keep us
connected to these environments
That's the reality we face now
And
the political system that
we have currently
is for the voters to follow discussions
that are happening
Public discussions that are happening
in the pages of the newspapers
or on tv screens
and then maybe have at home
or at some social gatherings
private discussions about those topics
But currently the space of political
discussion is very changed
and I don't think that we can ever
as what previous mentions
Changed the rules and the regulations
of environments
and the things faster than
they are developed
Also we are living in the changes
changing ever so faster
And the regulations will never
be able to catch up with that
So we need not to look at these
new mechanics and new realities
as something completely new
We need to adapt a mindset
in our judicial system and
in our political system
that everything has already been there
There was a time where
the printing press was something new
and we were able to adapt to that
And there was a time where reading
was something new
and we were able to adapt to that
And we need to think of
those new things that
political spaces privately owned
Some
In some way
or that some people are
very much disconnected
from the places where the political
discussions happens
because they are not connected
to the internet or to the news
because they don't have time to go
These are all things
that being together,
being here
So
We need to adopt a mindset where
we use previous decisions
about privacy and about speech
and just apply them
to the new environment
Don't pretend this is something
completely new
because there was something completely
new fifty thousand hundred years ago
or so
But
To your question
I think the parliaments can adapt
to the new systems
because they are now quite more
connected to the average voter
because we are daily spammed
as our system of
As our information system
of the parliament actually
decided actually to be called with
calls from basic citizen like
Before if you wrote your representative
in the system we are based on
you had to write a letter,
you had to send it
and it took a few days to reach
And it was an effort
Now you can create a webpage
where everyone can register
and just send their votes
by two clicks of a button
And that's a new form of connection
between citizens and its representatives
We are so reached the time where it's
what does it mean to have
a public political meeting
has quite changed
Because beforehand if there was some
public political meeting
where discussion was happening
If you wanted to know what was happening
you needed to get a time and get there
to be even able to
witness the discussion
and for what the politicians
were saying
But today
the public meeting can be recorded
and can be stored forever
and that's a new thing
And
Some politicians are quite
not compatible to that
and that's also because now
it's not only the media
It can be everyone who can go
and see a meeting
And if you go to see a meeting,
a public meeting
You can be recorded being there
saying something
Even if you are a private citizen
not represented
it's also something that we see as
a new issue
because now our lives
are kept there forever
As it was once said
the internet never forgets
and never forgives
And that's the reality
we live in now
And that's related to the politicians or
even active citizens need to
be able to be part of
You need to be able to own
to your previous decisions
to your previous things
Okay, Mr. Pikal
Thank you for now
Now I would like to turn to Mr. Boháč
and I would jump back to
the topic we discussed earlier
in this panel
And this is a topic and
problems or problematic of
non-transparent algorithms
That are used in political campaigns
and political environment
We all know the
Cambridge Analytica scandal
Cambridge Analytica used
collected and misused
users data,
personal data of Facebook users
to political aims and political goals
in political disputes and campaigns
This kind of behaviour
and the problems of
non-transparent algorithms
and how to say,
behavioural profiling of
the users and of the voters
That's
what is
Why is they are
We can see the creating of the
so called closed bubbles
and alternative realities
in the public spaces
So I'm asking you Mr. Boháč
as a journalist
Do social media and media in general
and internet
divide society
instead of bringing it closer together?
And what's the solution?
If I will come back
I see a big problem if,
as we discussed,
there are non-transparency
of algorithms
and different purpose of
different social media
or different platforms
when like it's like kind of
a question about like free will
Whether we have it here
and whether we can decide
about ourselves
in a condition where we don't really
know the algorithms
which are shaping our behaviour
And in conditions where algorithms
changes like every now and then
It can change non-transparently
in a minute
And that's the problem that we face
because internet per se is,
at least definitely for media,
a great space to spread
good quality information
or to let anyone write
if he or she has something to say
But then like what we face
are like algorithms
in which we like jump in a water
which we don't fully understand
and we don't know how to swim there
and how to plan for longer time
And that's the question of free will
because how we behave,
what we consume,
how we vote
depends on the context in which
we understand ourselves
And
On social media
with a small group of owners
or with non-transparent algorithms
it's not really possible to plan
for a long time
and it’s the same for
like being citizens
or like being like journalists having
or like being politicians maybe
The problem is that the context
in which we act
can change according to the will
of the usually super rich owners
of the platform
And that's what I see as
a big problem nowadays
and like which hinders to be a
like citizen becomes citizenship
and like politics is about
long period planning,
the same as,
like it's also how media should act
How we should work to
be able to foresee
or to see to the future
and put people and things that are
going on into some broader context
Well it's quite difficult
when we can’t plan
because somebody does it for us
Somebody makes this
I call it sometimes like
This changes in algorithms
Like small short doctrines
Which just makes people confused
because they don't know the context
in which they appear
because of some small change
in Facebook or Twitter
or wherever
Which we have to adapt again and again
and focus mostly on adapting
in the new environment which we face
and not to some longer term
values of work
So yeah
Thank you very much
Now I would like to ask
Miss Renata Avila again
And
In your work, you also are focused on
transparency of algorithms
and there are used
on all of your platforms
And you also mentioned regulation
Regulation that maybe
it's too late for regulation
But I'm asking you
do you think that regulations is
the good way how to
How to fight
Or how to fight against non-transparent
algorithms and microtargeting?
And
how this kind of regulation
should look like?
It's very difficult
I mean,
there is plenty plenty of papers
questioning transparency
as the ideal solution
And it is like the burden is
placed basically on
institutions that are already
like, you know
We have seen the
implementation of GDPR
if you have lots of resources,
you can implement well
If you have constrained resources
due to austerity
and now we will see them with
the imminent economic crisis
coming around the corner
The institutions to enforce
the regulation
I mean,
let's start for something
Social media companies
are taking full advantage
of our intense engagement
and political engagement online
They barely pay taxes
in the European Union
On top of that,
The damage and the disruption
and the difficulties
that they are putting our
electoral authorities into
and the political parties into
Because of the obscurity
of the algorithms
are making the institutions
and are forcing the institutions to
allocate even more public money
into scrutinizing their actions
On top of that,
It is the same question
of all the transparency
and the audity opening
those black boxes
will guarantee us that we can actually
do something about it
because it's something that is
constantly changing
and requires constant supervision
I know that I will suggest
something quite radical
But maybe we need to put a stop on
the use of social media for political purposes
Maybe we should, you know, like
maybe a very radical,
a very very very radical measure
will be to ban social media
in political campaigns fully
Or social media based in a country
that we cannot regulate
I think that an interim
and that's radical of course,
the radical thing
that you could only use social media
that is fully transparent
and that doesn't have algorithms
suggesting things to voters
and that is hosted locally
or at least in the EU
That would be a super radical measure
but maybe an interim point would be
to regulate these companies from the
I mean
Elections and electoral laws
are public laws
And maybe an middle point of it
would be like to
ask at least during a political campaign
to deactivate
and not to be
First, that they cannot sell ads
Not disclosing the ads really
is not making a big difference
when they cannot sell ads
And second,
that they deactivate algorithms
showing  some things and hiding
other things during the political
At least the most intense
political campaign period
Because what's happening now is
is really murky
Because we can be
Like all of us, we can be all Pirates
for example
and be at the same table
and be connected to the same
Wi-Fi connecting point
and we will be seeing as absolutely
different things on our screens
Even with the same
political orientation
And that is the end of politics
Personalised politics is
the end of politics
because it's the end of
a common sphere,
a common space of dialogue
and a shared political plan
and a common understanding of
the political affair of your party
I know that it sounds quite radical
this position
but I don't think that social media
as it is now
Which is highly concentrated,
completely obscure,
completely tax irresponsible
and data intense
I don't think that it is bringing
any good to our democracies
I don't think that it is
The day’s past when it was
an equalizer for small parties
And
Now it’s those who can afford a
sophisticated data infrastructure,
those who are like winning elections
And sadly it's not necessarily the
most democratic side of politics
the one taking full advantage of it
And we cannot own it
and we are with the hands tied
and we will be even with more
hands tied with the next generation
of pre-created agreements
that will completely impede us
even analysed by a judge
that could
that's running these systems
Thank you
Thank you very much
Mr. Pikal,
Renata Avila talked about
internet giants
and that they are getting more
and more powerful
when it comes to shaping public opinions
In your point of view Mr. Pikal,
how to democratise or decentralise
the internet or the internet giants
that are so powerful
in shaping our public opinion
and our companies?
Thank you for the question
Well I think it's not only about
transparency
because if you have transparency
how your newsfeed is formated
Well, you know
but unless you have power
over how your newsfeed is formated
Actual power that you can decide
I don't want to see this
and you know what your actions bring
There was always this
whether where my newsfeed should
be formed from the latest
or from the most recent
or from the most engaging
because
We need to understand
that the social media
are there not to like inform us
or create some opinions
And if we try to make them to say
“No you don't,
you can't like just be
you need to inform people
on the right opinions
I think it's the bad approach
because you just perpetrated
the media giants
You just create them,
give them more platform,
give them more power
But
You need to give the power
to the people
The people need to decide that
I don't want and I don't need
to be on this media giant
I want to have power over my news
because your reality that informs
your opinions and your decision-making
is created by the news you consume
This is nothing new that
we all see different realities
in different news
It was always there
You just decided what
news channel you watched,
You decided what
newspapers you buy,
what you read
If you read a sports section only
or not
And we kinda had this before
because
if your chief and leader tells you
that those people over there
eat babies and are satanic worshippers
you have no problem with
going at war with them
But if you
actually meet them and learn
what's their experience
maybe you can understand them
and maybe you can learn that
they are actually not worshippers
They just worship a different god
which is as false as your own
So the seclusion of people
and creating of tribes
it's nothing new
but it is
We are now secluded in our nations
We are now secluded within our groups
and it's the new
Because your neighbour has
a completely different
framework of reality than you
because you don't go to
the same church
You are not listening to
the same news
You are seeing completely
different news
based on your opinions
and on what ad revenue
which you best generate
So I think the thing we need to do
is to give the users or people power
to get away from the media,
to own your data to decide
what your data goes where
and it's kind of literacy
Because everything is political
Moving is political
Decisions on whether or not
we should map trees
and see where tree fruit grows
is political
It's about how we shape society
So you can't say
There can’t be anything political
because you can make
anything political
The colour of your shirt
you can make it political
So if we want to combat this
I think that people need
to own their data
and own their profiles
They can
They should be able to decide
to disregard them
They should be able to take them
and move them elsewhere to go
And this is the problem, I think
that the landscape of social media
or political space or social space
is completely monopolised by now
And there are two ways to destruct them
You can either buy the monopoly
as we did before
Or you can break it down
There's also a third option
You can build a public infrastructure
Because if this is an infrastructure
that is currently needed
and our democracy cant function
without it properly
You can't be properly connected to the
societal discourse from social media
Then there needs to be
public social media,
publicly owned
As we have publicly owned televisions,
public broadcast
You need to have public social media
That's like three options we have
I really don't think the taxes
will solve that
Thank you very much
Now
Mr. Boháč, I would follow the force
of Mr. Pikal
and what's your opinion when
it comes to internet giants?
Do you think that they are too powerful?
And do you think
Do you believe that they are shaping
our democracy?
And do you think that it's bad?
And should it be regulated?
Yeah, it's probably going to be
boring with me
But I can agree with Vojtěch Pikal
Because as we see it now
like digital platforms
I can
it’s easy to understand
because with internet
as a quite new thing
We appeared in the world
which we, like
in the time of new platforms
nobody understood like
what kind of shift it is
but like now we have
people or owners of platforms
who profit from like everything
what was done without their
investment in that
Like having like billions of people
who are able to create content
Who can write posts or make pictures
Who can post online all this
environment of media
which are partly dependent on having
Or sharing it on social media
Like it's not something they created
It's not something like
Facebook invested in
to have all these infrastructures ready
for people to upload content
and they just monetise from it
So I think that it's possible
that it only happened because
it was kind of a big shock
but now it's definitely
a time to talk about
like how to change it
and how to make it more fair probably
And how to make them
Maybe
Don't know exactly whether I am
for like public social networks
But definitely I'm pro or for
ownership of my data
which I gave to some platform
and to be able to withdrawn it again
as fast as I can
and put it to another social network
But like the problem nowadays is
that like the area is
totally monopolised
and that we should have
different social networks
with basically the same principles
Maybe probably with open algorithms
where I can move
and if I don't like anymore
When I'm informed about the algorithm
of Facebook, for example
to be able to withdraw all my content
I've been making for
the last ten years already probably
and put it to another place
because, as I said,
nobody was paid for doing this
Or like to force those platforms
to share their profits
from what we created before
And then I think also like
in competition
it can be the same as normal media
That we have like a few private
We have one like public
social network per country
or per I don't know,
maybe in the European Union
because I don't really like
this country boundaries
but then it's up to us to discuss
what are the right boundaries like
in which social media should work
There is this idea of Wikipedia to have
like a social network as well
which would be much more democratic
I like it a lot
And I think that like also
we can also see in media landscape
that if you have many different
media ownerships
and it's not concentrated around
media enhance of oligarchs
but you have different types
For example, yeah you can have media
owned by big money
but also like public media
and also good environment to
flourish for like smaller media
targeted on ideological viewpoints
of the world
or different things
So I think the same environment should
exist also in the social media world
where everybody can choose where
he or she would like to exist
Okay, thank you very much
It's very interesting this divide
Maybe
I would ask Miss Renata Avila
because I noticed that you agreed
with the thought of Mr. Pikal
when it comes to publicly owned
social platforms or online platforms
and social media
But for some people I think
it sounds maybe little bit scary
you know,
to imagine that state or public owned
some online media
it's against free market and so on
How do you think it should look like
You know,
this kind of ownership
of social media?
We were not successful actually
anywhere in the world
to have good public media
Good public media that is plural
That is well funded
That is high quality
That is respectful of diversity,
respectful of the intelligence
of people
Because one of the things
that I want to highlight here
Which is also important
is that ten years ago, you know,
we were saying
Information power to the people
And people are intelligent
and people can decide
and people will take information
that the internet is bringing
and transform the world
Ten years later we’re saying
that people are so silly
That they cannot differentiate
fake from real
and that they
I mean our narratives
Or maybe not our narratives
but media narratives
Commercial media narratives
or even state media narratives
are taking that power back
even with failed economics models
and saying
"No no no no, you are not
capable to publish,
You are not capable to understand"
And I think that this crisis
that we are into
which is the democratic crisis
Is the perfect opportunity
that progressive politicians
need to seize
To reinvent and reimagine
Reimagine public media
And public media of course will have
this component of distribution,
co-creation, collaboration
and dialogue
And
that’s what we need to imagine
in a multidisciplinary way
And I think that that's also what
needs to be funded with public funds
Or maybe with a mix of public
and private funds
with always guaranteeing power to the
people in terms of data
So full control of data
The ability of communicate in private
and also the ability to express
opinions anonymously
And interoperability,
so I'm not tied to one single platform
Plurality
So I can express myself
in my own language
And some sort of self-sovereignty
I think that the
I don’t have the magic model
and I think it might take
different shapes
and it might take different
trials and errors
but I think it will be very silly
not to start experimenting right now
And I think the big opportunity is
to start experimenting
in this digital social innovation
that will lead us to proper
21st century public medias
serving the purposes of informating
the public in a balanced way
and allowing all voices to have
a chance to express themselves
and like enabling democracy basically
I think that the cities can
put some money into it
to start like pilots at a small level
I believe in these possibilities
and I believe that that can be
I believe that that can be a vehicle
towards our independence
from Silicon Valley
And I really believe
that it might happen
the European frame is the
ideal frame for that to happen
Thank you very much
Before we move to our last subtopic,
I just want to ask Mr. Boháč and
Mr. Pikal if you wanna react to these
to these ideas of decentralisation
of the social media
Yes, Mr. Pikal
I would just like to add that
internet has no boundaries
and some public social media platform
operated by state
just means that you can create
a state network
that controls the public discourse
We have states that already censor
their own internet
This thing just enhanced so
you need to be vigilant of that
And I think that
And also I would like to
point out one thing
We are now four people in a bubble
And we don't know if our jokes
land on the audience
We don't know if what we say is
regarded as good or bad
With these online discussions,
we are kinda losing the feedback
as the public spaces usually have
from the audience
in form of clapping or booing
That's something that we are losing
when we are moving to
democracy of digital
And
that is a thing that I think it
needs to be incorporated
into the social media to work well
that you have somehow the
Because,
as it was said,
in beginning we spoke that information
would be picked up by the crowds
and we would get good information
to rise to the top
But as currently the media
and the social platforms are built,
they are driven by emotions
because emotions spread
much better and much faster
and if we want to have
good digital platforms
for online discussions,
for forming opinions,
for creating the framework
of our society
they need to be driven not by emotions
but by information
and participated discussions
And for that is, I think,
quite a complicated task
in form of design
And that means that the platforms
would be designed
with this in mind
and also the question of who
and how would there be paid
and profit it
This is a difficult one
because it can't be by ads
because ads run on emotions
not on intelligent forms
Thank you very much
If you want to add something
Yeah
I wrote just short notes
that for me it was like
an interesting idea
of this like
public social media on a state level
because we are just filming
about media in Central Europe
and out of four countries you have
the public media
In one country, it doesn't really work
In two countries, it's controlled
by governments
and in one country,
it's under attack
so it's quite sensitive
thinking about like how to make it
in the principle of all affected
somehow
to make social media for people
who have like more inclination
to communicate with each other
And not under like strong political
influence in those countries
where the democratic tradition
is not that strong
So
Then I was thinking, okay,
maybe we still can have something
what is more global
but allows different people in different
countries of different interest
to use for their own
But still there is the problem
of control
which I think has to be addressed
and will be quite difficult to decide
Thank you
Let’s move to other question
And the question is
Is there some positive impact of
digital technologies on our democracy?
Because so far we have discussed quite
I would say, some
some negative aspects
But I would also add some positive
aspects of digital technologies
and internet technologies
on our democracies
So Miss Renata Avila
what positive impacts do you see?
Yes, of course
Yeah
Please answer
We really have the possibilities to
for the first time
massively educate politically
a lot of people
in a very creative and engaging way
We shouldn't miss that opportunity
because that's the key to fix
all the things digital
We have the new generation
fully politically aware
with critical thinking developed
and we can even use,
you know,
we can use all the technologies
that we have now
to reach them out
and to prepare them to be critical
about what they are using
and critical about the importance
of it for the future
I mean that we are like a
It's up to us to activate
a political transformation
that we have never seen before
Thank you
Thank you very much
Now I would turn to Mr. Pikal
You already mentioned some advantages
of digital technologies
on our democracy
but could you highlight some specifics,
Specific examples
in which way digital technologies
and the internet developed
our democracies in a good way?
The internet has allowed us
to be better informed
and better educated
in all kinds of things
You can learn almost anything
on the internet
if you are not lazy to search
And this is still true
and will remain true
And you are able to be
better connected
We can operate with our colleagues
from different continents,
from different cultural settings
easily
There are great things built like
Wikipedia or everything
But
We can have better jobs sometimes
Because now we are better informed
on some completely new topics
So I think in regards to
spreading information
and education as a whole
Because now more people
can access higher education
and higher levels of information
and topics
through the internet
Through areas
From further countries
from all over the world
And this means more educated people
and who better understand
the world around them
And
you also need to understand that
people who grew with the internet
know there's nothing real
on the internet
Every girl is a boy
Every small girl is a security
intelligence agent
But people who did not grow
with the change
need to learn this
But
They learnt in previous times that
not everything that is said on TV
is true
That not everything that you read
in the newspaper is true
And we just need to understand that
not everything that
your friend sends to you
through the email
is true just because
they are friends
Maybe not even the friends
Somebody just takes their email
and is using it as spam
or just something wrong
So we need to learn
to be really literate
about the information that we receive
That's I think the only thing
that really needs to happen
is that we are
just as some literacy is understood that
all films and jokes and anything
can be political and ridiculise people
And also things on the internet
may be not true
and can ridiculise people
It can be not true
That's all you need
Thank you very much
Mr Boháč,
The same question for you
Which positives and advantages
do you see when it comes to influence of
digital technologies on our democracy?
Like for me the answer is quite easy
because I run a online channel
focused on feature news from abroad
and now
Like it wasn't before coronavirus
probably
But now we have like
the massive migration into digital
into online world
I see that I can really communicate
with people from different places
and it's normal for me like,
right now
to get information about
what's going on in
like East Russia or China
or I don't know Australia
very easily
And people are used to like
in the way of organizing work
as well like
That I don't have to go everywhere
I can study the context
I can very easily connect with somebody
from like thousands of km away
and get the context
I can ask somebody to walk me through
a city or through a situation
and explain me what is going on
and it's definitely like
for the global democracy,
for kind of for overcoming
national boundaries
It's something just great
But then there is also
Oh yeah, we should be positive now
But
I see that it's awesome
for people who are gifted,
Who are from like
a good social background,
Who are active
But then we have great big gaps
between who had the opportunity,
who had the good education
and who can like avoid somehow
the algorithms
just to stick with those online drugs
of social platforms
where you just consume
what is like most profitable
for owners of the social
Of the digital platforms
But like if
And then it goes hand in hand
with education
How to use the internet
And I still think that
in education there is
a great potential in
showing people and learning
how to use it
to give us the best,
so
But in the end it's definitely a tool
which just deletes
Like can delete any barrier
But we have to like fight
It's not about what's positive
about internet
Because internet is the same struggle,
the same fight as the real life
where we have to take care that
like the critical mass,
the big majority of people
is not just left to be like
kind of goods for tech giants
Thank you
Thank you very much all for
the participation at this panel
Unfortunately, our time has passed
So thank you
Thank you very much
Miss Renata Avila, Mr Pikal and Mr Bohač
For joining us today
Thank you to the audience
for being here with us
and I hope we will see you
again very soon
and I hope it's gonna be offline
face to face again
Have a nice evening
Thank you very much
Thank you to everyone
Good evening